Yeah, so welcome to this presentation about Open Telemetry and Sampling.
Today with me is Julius.
Hi everybody.
Yeah, so we have to pass around the microphone.
I'm Julius.
I work at Cisco mainly in the telco domain.
I'm doing a lot of infrastructure, cloud related stuff.
Lately I had the task to add Open Telemetry to our stack and yeah, that's why I'm here
talking about Open Telemetry.
One second.
Okay.
Yeah, my name is Pinar.
I work at RATED mainly on observability tools and they also have the chance to contribute
to Open Telemetry.
And what we discussed today is basically a quick recap for those who haven't been in
the room earlier about Open Telemetry.
We discussed traces, why it's important and basically how we should sample our traces
and what is probably not a good idea.
And then also some challenges that may occur when you would like to apply some approaches
to sample your traces.
So what is the Open Telemetry project?
The Open Telemetry project is a project which merged between open tracing and open sensors
a few years ago.
It's a CNCF project which is quite fastly growing and the idea is to provide a vendor
neutral data collection so that you don't get vendor locked in by some agents or you
need to learn the stack always new.
And the project consists out of multiple parts.
There is a specification in API on SDK.
So in case you would like to instrument your applications, there are auto instrumentation
agents that we have seen earlier today as well as a collector which was also shown in
the previous talk which is able to have different inputs, process them, send them to the back
end of your choice.
There are other helpers like Helmcharts and the Kubernetes operator which make our life
on Kubernetes then way easier.
So in this example we see a web shop which is instrumented using the Open Telemetry SDK
and what we get from it, we mainly care here about the traces.
For example, a user will interact with our gateway.
The gateway will then enrich the context and add the tracing context on top.
This one is then propagated to all our different services.
Those services would then report the data that is created, for example, the spans with
some metadata to a database which helps us afterwards to analyze it and visualize it.
So for example, we get then this nice architecture view that we can see on the top as well as
the gun chart like view on the bottom which helps us then to analyze basically how the
request went.
So if we have long delays, if we have some errors in between, we can just find this out
and see it.
So when we have a normal web shop, for example, the majority of traces is probably quite not
really relevant for us.
Traces of interest would be probably, let's say, transactions which have special attributes
or error traces or high delays.
And we should keep an eye on this because if we sample everything, this might turn out
to be a bit more expensive.
Here we have an example from my colleague Julius from their setup.
It produces a decent amount of traces, around one million per minute.
And if you would sample all the traces and directly ingest it, for example, into AWS
X-ray, you would end up with around $250,000 just for sampling the traces with probably
a lot of data that is not really relevant.
If you would bring this down to, let's say, 0.1% or even less because you only are interested
in this special attribute, some errors or some high delays, this becomes way more reasonable.
We go down to $250, and if you have to explain to your manager that you would like to analyze
your system and you would like to spend a quarter million, this is probably not the
best idea.
So the question is now, how can we bring this down to 0.1% or even less?
There are some approaches.
One would be head-based sampling.
Using head-based sampling, the gateway in the beginning would make the decision if a
trace gets sampled.
This information is then propagated in the trace context, and we can then, for example,
define a probability of 10% so that we would like to keep 10% of our traces.
And so this is then usually configured in the SDK.
So the SDK can be configured using some environment variables, which then leads to the point that
we always need to restart our gateway because this is the instrumented part, as so on as
the others, but the first one makes the decision.
There are options to overcome this.
There is the Jega remote sampler.
This was originally introduced in the Jega project and the Jega agent and collector,
which communicate up with each other.
And basically the collector will have a list of configurations for the SDK, and therefore
we can configure the SDK on the fly, which is then quite useful.
There is another way to reduce the amount of traces, so we can sample always and send
the data to a specific collector.
And this collector will use then the probabilistic sampling processor to also bring down the
amount of traces that we then finally ingest into our database or our service that whatever
we take there.
Another approach would be tail-based sampling.
Tail-based sampling is slightly different.
So here we would store the trace and all its spans that are associated to it in the
collector, for example, that will receive all this data.
And this collector will then make the decision if a trace should be sampled or not.
And we will come to this decision later.
You can define certain policies which then basically help you to determine if a trace
should be stored.
The setup is then a bit more complex because you add another component.
And also then you will add extra cost because you need an extra collector which does this.
In general we can say if we have rare events, so like there are sometimes small errors or
sometimes high delays, we can definitely better capture them because we can guarantee that
we have this.
With head-based sampling you lose this information if we have a sampling rate of one percent and
we have an error rate which is way less.
This is not really working.
So tail-based sampling also introduces some overhead.
For this one million traces you need around these resources that are listed there.
So basically an X large or two X large instance on AWS which will add another 130 to 260
US dollars on top.
But still when you compare the price it's still super reasonable.
So the next thing is basically how would this look like in a setup when we introduce the
open-talented collector with a tail-based sampler.
We would have here, what you can see here is the service one which is requesting service
two up to service four.
And the trace context is there propagated and the trace one goes through them.
In service three an error occurs so the span and the traces everything is reported to the
tail-based sampling collector.
And the tail-based sampling collector then will make the decision if this should be sampled.
As we assume we have a policy which says we would like to store errors.
In that case this one would be written to our database and then finally we can observe
this trace.
This is a configuration how it looks like when you deploy the tail-based sampling collector
using the open-talented operator.
On the left we see it's the kind open-talented collector.
But the more interesting part is more in the config.
In the config we define the receiver, processor and exporter.
This is basically the input what we want to modify and then what we would like to export
and where to send it.
In the pipeline section we then glue this together and we can define the OTLP receiving
part is what we would like to ingest.
The processing part we have them there listed there and they will be processed in this order
and then they will be exported in this case to Temple.
On the right side we have more details about the tail-based sampling collector.
And there we see for example the policies that are defined.
There is the error-retained policy and on top without an error so it's an OR.
We have another policy that says we would like to keep 10% of our traces.
There are more options to configure those policies.
I link them here in the slides.
When you go to the GitHub page you see there's tons of.
One interesting would be probably the OTLP, what is it?
Scripting language name.
I forgot it.
Anyway.
You can glue there quite complex policies if you like to.
Another important thing is the numbers of traces.
So you should tune the numbers of traces always together with the memory limit and the resources.
The reason is with the numbers of traces we define how many traces we would like to keep
in memory and the trace can have a different amount of data when so multiply spans, more
metadata, less metadata.
So this is basically a number which isn't useful to define the memory usage.
And yeah, so therefore we should tweak the others too.
And then we have the decision weight.
Since we have tail-based sampling we have no defined end of a trace.
This means we never can make sure that this trace ended.
So there can always be a span that is reported.
We should tweak it in a way that it's reasonable as short as possible but the longest we can
expect or the longest trace that we might expect should be the number so that we don't
end up with inconsistent traces afterwards.
And especially if you have a CACD system that you are tracing, this number is probably way
higher and if we had a 10 seconds value every step would be its own trace so we would then
end up with inconsistency.
The same when we want to replicate our setup here.
You can see it's the same set of as before but now we have two collectors.
What's happened here, the Kubernetes law balancer will send us to collector 1 and collector
2 independently and now both collectors will do their decision on their own.
So collector 1 will go and make the decision after 10 seconds and it will see in service
3 there was an error span so it will sample this and write it to the database.
While collector 2 and collector 4 will send the data to collector 2.
This one will see the policy is not hit and it will just drop it.
So next Julius will show you how to solve this too after we change the microphone.
Like this, can you hear me?
Right, so maybe it wasn't clear on this slide what you see here is actually a problem because
one of our tail samplers decided to sample the trace while the other one decided not
to sample the trace because the span with the error was only propagated to one of the
samplers.
So I will talk about how we can fix this by using smart load balancing in front of it.
What we would like to have is a kind of load balancer which distributes all the spans that
belong to one trace to a single tail sampler so that the tail sampler which is buffering
all the spans can make the right decision in the end.
Additionally, we would also like to create multiple instances of our load balancer so
that we can scale every component because if you have a single load balancer that would
be a single point of failure in our system.
Yeah, so how do we do this?
Introducing the load balancing exporter.
So the load balancing exporter is also part of the open telemetry project.
It consists of three main parts.
The first one is a resolver.
The resolver is responsible for finding all the upstream back ends.
So in this case, this would be our tail sampling processors.
There are multiple ways to do this.
Usually this is done using DNS.
This can be done using the Kubernetes API but it can also be done by just hard coding
a list of back ends and IP addresses in there.
Second, we have to define how to talk to our upstream back ends.
You can define the protocol.
I think at the moment there's only the OTLP supported but it's very easy to add additional
protocols to that and people will do probably.
The last thing we need is to define our routing strategy.
So we have to define what traces go to or what the routing or the load balancing should
be based on like a shouting key.
By default, this is the trace ID but you can also specify it to be the Kubernetes service.
Right.
And the load balancing parts use a method called consistent hashing.
I will not go too much into detail but this makes sure that the two load balancers, they
don't have a state but they still sample or send traces with the same ID and spent with
the same ID always to the identical tail sampling processor.
Let's see how we can define this in code.
It's pretty much what I just said.
You define the routing key.
You define the protocol that you would like to speak to the upstream back ends.
You can define a sending queue which is acting as a buffer between the load balancer and
the tail sampling back ends.
You can define the resolver.
In this case, we're going to use the DNS resolver.
We make use of the headless service which the open telemetry operator is creating for
us.
It contains all the IP addresses of the parts of our tail sampling processor.
And on the side, you can see the different configurations that you could use for static
or Kubernetes-based resolvers.
Right.
So to resolve the problem, we can easily scale.
There are some problems and there are some details that you have to care about when deploying
the load balancing exporter.
Once of all, the load balancer exporter only makes sense if you can export the traces faster
than you receive them, of course.
Because otherwise, the traces and the spans that will pile up and your sending queue will
be at full capacity very quickly.
There is a lot of metrics exported also by the load balancer exporter which you can observe,
like the queue capacity, the queue size, and also the back end latency which you can use
to make sure that the load balancing is happening in an equal fashion across your back ends.
If this is not doing well, it looks like this.
On the top, I'm not sure if you can see this.
Hmm.
It's not possible to turn off the lights, unfortunately, and we didn't have time to make the slides,
like, inverted.
Right.
Okay.
The problem is the queue capacity is always reached and traces will be dropped in that
case.
So it's not enough to make a big buffer between your two connections or between the connection.
You need to make sure that you're actually exporting or writing traces faster than you're
receiving because eventually they will overflow this queue.
In our case, the problem was the frottling on the CPU, basically, because the tail sampling
processors are very CPU intensive and also memory intensive.
The next problem that we have is that we need to load balance the connection to our load
balancers.
So it sounds a bit weird, right?
What you can see on the bottom chart is what happens if you just point your services at
two load balancing exporters and let Kubernetes do the load balancing.
You can observe that one of the exporters is handling, I think, it's 4,000 while the
other one is only doing half of that.
People who saw this before know it's probably GRPC connections, which are very long running
and Kubernetes doesn't like to load balance that.
What can we do instead?
We can use the OTRP HTTP protocol instead.
So this is using HTTP one.
So the load balancing will be working as intended.
However, we lose a bit of the efficiency of HTTP two.
The headers will be recent all the time.
The connection cannot be reused.
As an alternative, we could also use some level seven load balancing, NVoy, basically
instead of just passing the request to a different backend, we can inspect what's going on, take
the individual GRPC packets which are flowing and route them to the different load balancers.
NVoy is a beast.
You need to understand it.
You need people to maintain it.
You need to deploy it.
And so this is a more complex setup.
And the last option we could see here is to deploy open telemetry in a sidecar mode.
So what we saw before is basically running in the deployment mode.
We have a central collector.
Everybody is sending the traces to it.
And in the sidecar mode, we deploy a collector alongside our ports.
So if you have 10 ports, you would also need like 10 collectors which are running.
You see the problem.
You need more capacity on your cluster.
And there's a bit of overhead there.
Right.
Last point we're going to talk about is autoscaling which doesn't exist yet in the open telemetry
framework.
Where I come from, our traffic is very depending on the time of day.
So in the night, nobody is sending SMS, nobody is calling, whatever.
But during the day, we have high peaks of load.
So ideally, we will also like our tail sampling operation to be slower at night while it can
scale up during the day so we can save on the resources which can be pretty enormous,
as you saw.
Right.
And also what we observe is that the errors that we would like to catch usually happens
during the times where there is the highest load because then things go wrong.
Yeah.
And here you can see that the amount of SMS send correlates with the amount of received
spans.
I'm not sure if you can see it.
Okay.
So what me and Bina did is we set out on a mission to kind of build a thing about load
balancing, autoscaling solution that we can tie together.
What we came up with is using some sort of a Kafka intermediate stage between the tail
samplers and our load balancers.
Doing some autoscaling on Kafka is a well-known problem and it's solved.
So that was like a good fit for us.
We had the idea to make the tail samplers whenever they come up, create a topic on our
Kafka cluster representing this tail sampling processor.
And the load balancer, on the other hand, will do list topics on that Kafka cluster,
let's say every five seconds.
So when we create the tail sampler, our load balancer will know about it because it can
see the topic.
And what the load balancer will then do, it will do the same thing.
Instead of routing it to a different HTTP endpoint or different IP address, we will
route the traces and the spans to a different topic on our Kafka cluster.
So you have multiple tail samplers all listening to a single topic while the load balancer
is just rebooting to all those different topics.
Right.
That's basically the written description of the image that you saw before plus the configuration
options which we added in green.
So we added to the load balancing exporter the Kafka protocol so now it can speak Kafka
and send stuff using Kafka.
You can defa...
Sorry, I started in the wrong order.
The first one is the resolver which does the list topics call.
Then we have the protocol and finally on the receiver side, we have a similar topic,
a similar setup.
The only addition here is that we have the create topic call.
So whenever the receiver starts, it will create the topic automatically for us.
So we put this to a test, very basic test, Docker compose.
I think we spun up like one load balancer and two receiver pods, sent some traces.
And what we could see is that the setup is indeed working as intended.
So the load balancing works 50-50, the traffic is split perfectly and we can also see that
the topics are automatically created for us.
If you think this through, you can see that there could be like a lot of problems.
What happens if you want to scale down?
What happens to the topics?
Will there be cleanup?
What if I clean up or delete a topic but there's still stuff in it?
Do I have to think about, I don't know, that letter queues for the traces and spans that
I missed?
So definitely if you want to run this or deploy something like this in production, you have
to put a lot more thought into this than hacking together, I don't know, 500 lines of code.
Right.
Yeah, the slide with the GitHub link is gone so you cannot find the code.
Which brings us to the conclusion.
Quick recap, traces are valuable.
If you have a complex system, they get even more valuable.
Not all the traces are equally valuable.
If you have a bunch of 200 or case, nobody's really interested in them.
So you have to focus on the traces which are relevant for you or the ones that you're interested
in.
You can use head-based sampling or tail-based sampling.
Head-based sampling is very easy and cost-effective but you cannot put all the configuration that
you can do in tail-sampling.
Tail-sampling helps to focus you even better.
If you do tail-based sampling, you need to think about load balancing at the same time.
Yeah.
Right.
And the last point with the proof-of-concept that we did was just to show it's very easy
to extend the open telemetry framework with minimal code to achieve some custom solutions.
So you have Kafka, you can just bring open telemetry or make it match to whatever you're
running in production.
All right.
Thank you everybody for your attention.
Thank you.
Thanks for the talk.
You mentioned that you could switch from GRPC to HTTP so that you would get a new connection
every time.
Yeah.
So you could switch from the GRPC connection from time to time and let it reconnect.
The GRPC connection should reconnect?
Yeah.
Yeah, you can do that every five minutes, for example, just to mean that the client side.
Right.
So that's something that had to go into the OTLP receiver side, which then, so the exporter
side will then after five minutes just terminate the connection.
Yeah.
I was not aware that you can configure this in open telemetry.
But Kubernetes has this tendency to reallocate the game, the connection in the same node
anyways.
Okay.
If that's true then HTTP doesn't help.
Good point, yeah.
Any other questions?
Yeah, thank you for the talk.
So on the receiver there is the max connection age.
So you can, you know, and I have a question for long running traces.
So there is, you mentioned there is a limit like a timer.
You can set like 10 seconds and then the sampling decision will be made.
Is there a way to do it dynamically?
So let's say I see a tag from, let's say Kafka or something that takes longer to process.
And those traces would be sampled with a timer that is, I don't know, longer than the default.
As far as I know, there's no dynamic timing.
It's just a hard coded value.
It was the number.